---
{"author":"Emelia","category":null,"tags":null,"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/plays/play-9-create-a-privacy-policy-template/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---

##### **Takeaway: Risk exists, but deliberately designed data governance can create pathways for opening up data in responsible ways.**
Risk emerges in different ways when data sharing. Data misuse runs the gamut from truly harmful—misaligned actors can selectively choose data points to communicate harmful or untrue narratives—to merely inconsiderate—people could use data without acknowledging the original source.The risks of sharing data can rarely be fully eliminated, but there are practices and tools that can mitigate against potential threat.**

##### **Support play for intermediary organizations: Create a privacy policy template.**
People may be wary of sharing personal identifiable information without knowing how their data will be used and safeguarded. It is standard practice to share information about how this data will be used and protected at the start of any collaboration. When starting to collect new data, the organization can share their privacy policy detailing the information they will collect, how it will be used, information sharing and disclosure, users’  rights and choices, data security practices, and how changes to the policy will be made. This is common practice with many digital platforms or apps that collect personal information. While all privacy systems are fallible to breaches, this privacy policy can include that disclaimer. This type of privacy policy is a formal guarantee of stated values regarding data use, and can be utilized when collecting data from individuals or when collaborating with another organization. OEDP has created a standard privacy policy template that can be downloaded and adapted to organizational needs, found in the [Appendix](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CbNUyczCF5N8j4scna2uY9Y8jSRJWhbhG4H1TULtc8I/edit?tab=t.ltsayx3cgu98) (Resource 6).